Understanding what prominent factors of a household contribute most significantly to monthly electricity consumption is an important first step in diagnosing problematic outliers that may exist for certain types of homes to help each save money and energy. But there are numerous applications, especially related to low-income housing and customers in arrears or are facing potential cutoff for non-payment who may benefit the most from this and other studies. 

This study seeks to better understand what factors contribute most prominently to the affordable energy burden and how such factors can be used to help end use residential electricity customers save money and energy. 

# Quantifying the Affordable Energy Burden
Unlike virtually every other aspect of modern life, energy is something most humans simply cannot live without. It’s fundamental to daily life and, depending on the extremes of climate in various parts of the country or medical devices that need power to operate, it’s necessary for survival. But because energy is expensive and extrapolating on deferred revenue and devising strategies for improved cash flows are necessary accounting procedures for utilities, many companies focus on the energy burden. Or, more accurately, the measure of a household’s energy affordability gap, i.e. the proportion of total household income used to pay home energy bills, which usually includes electricity, natural gas and other utility fuels: 

Home energy burden=(Total utility spending)/(Total gross household income)

It’s a fairly straightforward calculation, but the elements aggregated to determine total utility spending can differ significantly, depending on the region, housing type and fuels available for heating, cooling and power. For example, if a household has a total utility expenditure of $3000 annually with a gross household income of $30,000 annually, the household’s home energy burden is 10%. Since the home energy affordability limit is about 6-7%, this household has a home energy affordability gap of 3-4% and is therefore deemed unaffordable, i.e. there’s a likelihood of the household going into arrears with energy providers and thus risking the potential of having the household’s energy turned off. The implications of these outcomes are significant in terms of health and well-being of any adults and children in the household. Therefore, it is critical for utilities to understand how this threshold affects their customer base and what factors potentially contribute to it.  

The 6% figure is a calculated figure based on the premise that utility costs should not exceed 20% of housing costs. Moreover, it is based on the premise that total shelter costs should not exceed 30% of income. 20% of 30% yields a 6% affordable utility burden [3]. 
The RECS dataset is interesting because it offers a unique ability to incorporate physical housing characteristics, the presence, use and age of various high energy consuming appliances along with socio-economic and socio-demographic information. The ability to build and improve upon previous models used to model similar types of customers offered a useful and pertinent area of focus for an evergreen challenge for which utilities are always struggling to find solutions.   

Various studies conducted using the United States Energy Information Administration’s Residential Energy Consumption Survey (RECS) data include machine learning models to predict energy consumption, presence of older appliances, proclivity to adopt solar and predict monthly energy costs (bills). This methodology seeks to better understand the key features that contribute to monthly energy consumption and how various residential customer profiles can be used to strengthen the effectiveness of marketing campaigns of targeted energy-saving programs, products and services for low-income customers who are at or above the energy affordability threshold. 

# Modeling the Energy Affordability Burden 
As useful as it may be to effectively model monthly household energy consumption, the ultimate utility of such information resides in the value it can create not just for energy companies, but for end-use customers to reduce their monthly energy expenses and save money. By focusing again on energy affordability and incorporating principles of feature engineering, a classification model can be created to accurately predict customers who are at or above the affordable energy burden. This has tremendous potential and significant financial implications for low-income customers and for cash flow management at utilities and energy companies. 

